Rr/getting started rework (#50)
AleoNet/welcome: documentation/guides/introduction/01_quick_start.md

Author: We want to showcase private and public state management with an intuitive example.  I added a couple sentences explaining that Aleo enables devs to create a variety of apps...let me know if you'd like me to expand on that section:  [bc6da27](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/bc6da2788be00f311bde088e2e3070d43544d49e)

---
id: quick_start
title: Quick Start
sidebar_label: Quick Start
---

> Deploy a token program on the Aleo Testnet directly from the [Leo Playground](https://play.leo-lang.org)

Reviewer: In general the language in here is great, but I think the introductory language should be a little bit more guiding so that people get proper introductory context.

Something like:
```suggestion
Welcome to the Aleo Quickstart. This quickstart will guide you through the core concepts of building on Aleo. In this guide, you will be guided through the process of deploying and interacting with your own Aleo program directly on the web via the [Leo Playground](https://play.leo-lang.org). 
```

Author: done [7b1005c](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/7b1005c03a0a2869443de2282e74d5f6cc8ab72b)

> 

Reviewer: We should give a quick summary of what this guide teaches the user.
```suggestion

## What you'll learn
1. **Aleo Accounts:** Learn how to create an Aleo account and create private and public data.
2. **Aleo Programs:** Learn how to interact with the Aleo network by deploying and executing your own program.
3. **Private and Public State:** Learn how to manage both private and public data on Aleo in order to create privacy preseving apps.
```

Author: done [4f2685f](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/4f2685f54cd6f34119b2d0067311ec22c8fc6f33)

## 1.  The Token program

> * In the Leo Playgorund, select `Token` from the `Examples` dropdown menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Leo Playground, select `Token` from the `Examples` dropdown menu.
```

We should put an explicit picture of selecting the token program here.

Author: added:  [17152c8](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/17152c8d606a9a9b6e7f7d3e70485508a9d4b75d)

:::info

> This programs enables a user to mint and transfer private and public tokens.  Prviate tokens are represented in data structures called Records and public tokens are recorded in public ledgers called mappings.  Data within a Record is only visibile to the Record owner while data contained in mappings is publically visible.

Author: done [4c095ac](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/4c095ac3b013412508cae93ba07bb51120766fbd)

:::

> Aleo's unique architecture enables a wide range of programs and applications beyond tokens and DeFi.  We use the Token program in this guide to illustrate how developers manage private and public state with an intuitive example.

Author: done [17152c8](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/17152c8d606a9a9b6e7f7d3e70485508a9d4b75d)

## 2. Generate a new Aleo account

### 2.1 Using the Leo Playground widget

> * Click on the Account Widget to generate a new Aleo Account.

Author: I added another link in section 1 when users are instructed to select the token program.
commit:  [5d66214](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/5d66214248f793766c0e4293e7befc1050ff6731)

![Account](images/new_account.png)

### 2.2 Using the Ecosystem Wallets

* [Leo Wallet](https://www.leo.app/)
* [Puzzle Wallet](https://puzzle.online/)
* [Soter Wallet](https://sotertech.io/)

:::note
Save your **Address**, **View Key**, and **Private Key** in a safe place, you'll need them later.
:::

## 3. Seeding your wallet with credits

To seed your wallet, you'll need to request credits from faucet provided by the ecosystem wallets at:
* [Leo Wallet Discord](https://www.leo.app/) (Scroll to bottom of the landing page to find Discord invite)
* [Puzzle Wallet Faucet](https://dev.puzzle.online/faucet)
* [Soter Wallet Faucet](https://faucetbeta.sotertech.io/)

The credits received from faucet will be public credits, which means they are publicly visible on the Aleo network.

You can check to see if your account received Testnet credits using any of the following block explorers:
<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
- [Provable Explorer](https://testnet.explorer.provable.com/)
- [Aleoscan](https://testnet.aleoscan.io/)
- [Aleo123](https://testnet.aleo123.io/)
- [Aleo.Info](https://testnet.aleo.info/)

> <!-- markdown-link-check-enable -->

Reviewer: Show them how to find the credits one one of the explorers. Basically just a link to the accounts page. When the widget becomes available on the Leo Playground, add the guide for that here.

Author: There is a widget for account balance (but not for arbitrary mappings)!  It even links to the Provable Explorer.
Added here:  [b36294e](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/b36294e7bf550b9837ddc6b6cd4c1c3d83b57cb3)

:::tip
While waiting for the credits to be sent to your wallet, you can proceed to the next step.
:::

## 3. Deploy a token program from the Leo Playground

Change the name of the program in line 1 of `src/main.leo` to use a unique identifier and then update the `program` field in the `program.json` file to match the new name. 

![program_name](images/program_name.png)

![program.json](images/program_json.png)

:::tip

> The length of the application name should be at least 10 characters to optimize deployment costs. Deployment fees increase exponentially (base^10) for each character fewer than 10, so shorter names lead to significantly higher costs. Using a name with 10 or more characters helps keep deployment costs reasonable.

Reviewer: More concise to optimize readability.

```suggestion
The length of the application name should be at least 10 characters. Deployment costs are higher for names shorter than 10 characters.
```

Author: done [762a10b](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/762a10b2dc1177896cffd3230cdec098bd07c7d3)

:::

> :::info
> The reason for using a random application name is that the Aleo network identifies each program with its unique Program ID, and no two programs can have the same ID in the program registry. By generating a random name, we ensure that our application's Program ID will be unique when deployed.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We can probably eliminate this section for readability.

Author: removed [823ba34](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/823ba3447d1ef46ed331b233c5113b9a8d8fe51c)

You are now ready to deploy your first Aleo program to the Testnet!

## 4. Deploy your token application

:::tip Make sure that your account is funded with sufficient Testnet credits to deploy to the network.  
:::

* Deploy your Leo application to Aleo Testnet

Click on the deploy widget to bring up the deployment window.

![deploy](images/deploy.png)

Enter your program name in the `Program ID` field and then enter your Private Key.

> You can view an estimate for the deployment cost by clicking `Estimate Fee`.  Once your ready to deploy, click `Deploy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can view an estimate for the deployment cost by clicking `Estimate Fee`.  Once you're ready to deploy, click `Deploy`.
```

Author: fixed:  [6bde738](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/6bde738cbf68152c0d83d8739cd20213581747b6)

<!-- markdown-link-check-enable -->

:::tip
While waiting for the credits to be sent to your wallet, you can proceed to the next step.
:::

## 3. Deploy a token program from the Leo Playground

Change the name of the program in line 1 of `src/main.leo` to use a unique identifier and then update the `program` field in the `program.json` file to match the new name. 

![program_name](images/program_name.png)

![program.json](images/program_json.png)

:::tip
The length of the application name should be at least 10 characters. Deployment costs are higher for names shorter than 10 characters.
:::

You are now ready to deploy your first Aleo program to the Testnet!

## 4. Deploy your token application

:::tip Make sure that your account is funded with sufficient Testnet credits to deploy to the network.  
:::

* Deploy your Leo application to Aleo Testnet

Click on the deploy widget to bring up the deployment window.

![deploy](images/deploy.png)

Enter your program name in the `Program ID` field and then enter your Private Key.

You can view an estimate for the deployment cost by clicking `Estimate Fee`.  When you are ready to deploy, click `Deploy`.

> You should have seen a confirmation that your Aleo application was deployed in the form of a pop-up with an ID that looks like the following `at1ucnyh3rjewyudk484jz4qey5nknfhrs7lnwwzl2h28vdvdryf5ys2wsxh0`. 

Author: commit:  [fb58639](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/fb5863962c1df4323d8d985140d525b0f6b509d7)

![deploy](images/deploy.png)

Copy your transaction ID to view the details of your deployment transaction on the Aleo block explorers:

<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
- [Provable Explorer](https://testnet.explorer.provable.com/)
- [Aleoscan](https://testnet.aleoscan.io/)
- [Aleo123](https://testnet.aleo123.io/)
- [Aleo.Info](https://testnet.aleo.info/)
<!-- markdown-link-check-enable -->

:::info
Depending on the size of your program, you may not have sufficient credits to deploy your program if you are using an account funded with only one faucet transaction.  If that's the case, you can still interact with a program already deployed to the Testnet.
:::

## 5. Execute a transaction

You can now use your deployed token program!  

:::tip
If you did not have enough funds to deploy a program, you can use the `token_quickstart.aleo` program to test the execution of the token program methods.

> :::

Author: [e564c02](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/e564c0216456a5000b02d3f4ebfd5f636f523489)

> When you call a method from your program, the logic is executed locally and is accompanied with a zero-knowledge proof that attests to the correctness of the program execution and its corresponding outputs.  This proof does not reveal any information about the input values.  If the proof is verified by the validators, then the blockchain state is updated.  

Author: done [b144a9c](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/b144a9c56cab6c63ab743ab6a700d55fecaa018c)

* Minting a private token

Minting a private token entails creating a Record.  Records are data structures that are stored on-chain as ciphertexts and can only be decrypted using the View Key, which is derived from the Record owner's Private Key.  This ensures that only the owner of a Record has the ability to decrypt it.  

> To mint a private token, navigate to the Execute widget in the Leo Playground and enter the name of your program in the Program ID tab.  Alternatively, you can use the deployed token program 'token_quickstart.aleo`.  Click the magnifying glass icon to confirm that the Program ID corresponds to a deployed program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mint a private token, navigate to the Execute widget in the Leo Playground and enter the name of your program in the Program ID tab.  Alternatively, you can use the deployed token program 'token_quickstart.aleo`.  

:::tip
Click the magnifying glass icon to confirm that the Program ID corresponds to a deployed program.
:::
```

Author: removed:  [a22d72f](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/a22d72f5e91d2a35115ebb9ba9146695be83d981)

![execute](images/deploy.png)

Next, enter your Private Key and select the `mint_private` method from the Function drop-down menu.  In the Inputs tab, enter your Account Address and a `u64` integer.

```
["ALEO_ADDRESS_HERE", "50u64"]
```
Click Estimate Fee followed by Execute.  As before with the deploy transaction, you can copy and past your transaction ID in a block explorer.  You should see something resembling the following:

![mint_private](images/mint_private.png)

:::info
The output of the transaction is a Record.  In order to decrypt the Record, you need to copy and past the ciphertext, navigate to the Records widget in the Leo Playground, enter the Record ciphertext along with the View Key that corresponds to your Account's Private Key, and click Decrypt.  The decrypted Record should resemble the following:
```{
  owner: aleo1kypwp5m7qtk9mwazgcpg0tq8aal23mnrvwfvug65qgcg9xvsrqgspyjm6n.private,
  amount: 50u64.private,
  _nonce: 3175255370513411091535466147458245312227668453916963245036391157478647265587group.public
}
```
To learn more about Records, click [here](../../concepts/fundamentals/02_records.md)
:::

* Mint a public token

> Public tokens are stored in mappings.  Unlike Records, which are encrypted on-chain, mappings will always contain public data.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Token program, public balances are stored in program mappings. Mappings are public key-value stores on Aleo Network nodes which store long term persistent public state onchain.

Below we will mint a public token using the `mint_public` function. When this function is run, it will update the balance in the `account` mapping corresponding to the specified Aleo `address`. 
```

Navigate back to the Execute widget and repeat the steps in the previous section for minting a public token.  The transaction summary from the block explorer should resemble the following:

![mint_public](images/mint_public.png)

> Notice that this transaction produces a Future instead of a Record.  A Future encapsulates a set of instructions for validators to execute on-chain, such as updating the values in a mapping.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the `mint_private` function, the `mint_public` function creates an execution transaction that contains a `Future` instead of a `Record`.  A `Future`  contains a set of instructions for validators to execute on-chain which can read or update mappings.  If the `mint_public` execution transaction is valid, it will be accepted by the validators which will run the instructions in the `mint_public` `Future` that update the `account` mapping.

This account mapping can then be queried publicly by anyone.
```

2. **Aleo Programs:** Learn how to interact with the Aleo network by deploying and executing your own program.
3. **Private and Public State:** Learn how to manage both private and public data on Aleo in order to create privacy preseving apps.

## 1. Generate a New Aleo Account

The first step in building on Aleo is to create an Aleo account. An Aleo account is a unique identifier that allows you 
to interact with the Aleo network. With it you can execute program functions, create your own private and public data, 
and deploy new programs. You can create an account using the Leo Playground or by using one of the ecosystem wallets.

### 1.1 Using the Leo Playground Widget

Click on the Account Widget to generate a new Aleo Account.

<img src={require('./images/new_account.png').default} width="400"/>

:::note
Save your **Address**, **View Key**, and **Private Key** in a safe place, you'll need them later.
:::

### 1.2 Using an Ecosystem Wallet

An account can be created using one of the wallets below. After installing any of the wallets below, you will be 
prompted to create an Aleo account.

* [Puzzle Wallet](https://puzzle.online/wallet)
* [Leo Wallet](https://www.leo.app/)

> * [Soter Wallet](https://sotertech.io/)

Reviewer 2: Also add `Fox Wallet`

Author: done [c95d3c1](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/c95d3c1fe7093ab5fb463fdfee7f6bb220f5429b)

* [Leo Wallet Discord](https://www.leo.app/) (Scroll to bottom of the landing page to find Discord invite)

The credits received from the faucet will be public credits, which means they are publicly visible on the Aleo network.

### 2.2 Verify Receipt of Your Testnet Credits

After receiving a successful confirmation from one of the faucets above, you can check your account balance by selecting
 `Get Account Balance` from the list of options in the query widget. Simply paste your wallet address in and press 
`Get`. Don't worry if they don't appear right away as your testnet credits may take a few minutes to arrive.

<img src={require('./images/account_balance.png').default} width="400"/>

When the credits arrive, you should see the following output in the query widget after pressing `Get`.

<img src={require('./images/provable_explorer.png').default} width="400"/>

Alternatively you can search for the transaction ID provided by the faucets on any one of the ecosystem's block explorers.

<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
- [Provable Explorer](https://testnet.explorer.provable.com/)
- [Aleoscan](https://testnet.aleoscan.io/)

> - [Aleo123](https://testnet.aleo123.io/)

Reviewer 3: Aleo123 testnet explorer seems stops updating new blocks, consider removing it until fixed.

Author: removed:  [14ac45f](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/14ac45fdcd280cea7d73ac9cffddffecc31b9e76)

> - [Aleo.Info](https://testnet.aleo.info/)

Reviewer 3: Aleo.Info doesn't seems like supporting testnet explorer, this page goes to error 404 Not Found, consider removing it.

Author: removed:  [14ac45f](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/14ac45fdcd280cea7d73ac9cffddffecc31b9e76)

:::

You are now ready to deploy your first Aleo program to the Testnet! Before proceeding, make sure that your account is 
funded with sufficient Testnet credits to deploy to the network.

### 3.3 Deploy Your Program to Testnet

Click on the deploy widget to bring up the deployment window. Enter your program name in the `Program ID` field and then 
enter your Private Key. You can view an estimate for the deployment cost by clicking `Estimate Fee`.  When you are 
ready to deploy, click `Deploy`.

<img src={require('./images/deploy.png').default} width="400"/>

When you click `Deploy`, the Leo Playground will build a `Deployment Transaction` and submit to the Aleo Network. 
This process may take a while. When it is finished, you should see a confirmation that your Aleo application was 
deployed in a pop-up containing the transaction ID. 

<img src={require('./images/deployment.png').default} width="800"/>

Copy the transaction ID to view the details of your deployment transaction on any of the Aleo block explorers:

<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
- [Provable Explorer](https://testnet.explorer.provable.com/)
- [Aleoscan](https://testnet.aleoscan.io/)

> - [Aleo123](https://testnet.aleo123.io/)

Reviewer 3: Aleo123 testnet explorer seems stops updating new blocks, consider removing it until fixed.

Author: removed:  [14ac45f](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/14ac45fdcd280cea7d73ac9cffddffecc31b9e76)

> - [Aleo.Info](https://testnet.aleo.info/)

Reviewer 3: Aleo.Info doesn't seems like supporting testnet explorer, this page goes to error 404 Not Found, consider removing it.

Author: removed:  [14ac45f](https://github.com/AleoNet/welcome/pull/50/commits/14ac45fdcd280cea7d73ac9cffddffecc31b9e76)

```
["ALEO_ADDRESS_HERE", "50u64"]
```
Click Estimate Fee followed by Execute.  As before with the deploy transaction, you can copy and past your transaction ID in a block explorer.  You should see something resembling the following:

<img src={require('./images/mint_private.png').default} width="1000"/>

:::info
The output of the transaction is a Record.  In order to decrypt the Record, you need to copy and past the ciphertext, navigate to the Records widget in the Leo Playground, enter the Record ciphertext along with the View Key that corresponds to your Account's Private Key, and click Decrypt.  The decrypted Record should resemble the following:
```
{
  owner: aleo1kypwp5m7qtk9mwazgcpg0tq8aal23mnrvwfvug65qgcg9xvsrqgspyjm6n.private,
  amount: 50u64.private,
  _nonce: 3175255370513411091535466147458245312227668453916963245036391157478647265587group.public
}
```
To learn more about Records, click [here](../../concepts/fundamentals/02_records.md)
:::

### 4.3 Mint a Token Publicly

In the Token program, public balances are stored in program mappings. Mappings are public key-value stores on Aleo Network nodes which store long term persistent public state onchain.

> Below we will mint a public token using the `mint_public` function. When this function is run, it will update the balance in the `account` mapping corresponding to the specified Aleo `address`. 

Reviewer 3: Is there a missing screenshot to show an example of `mint_public`?

Reviewer 3: I see, it just the "Below ..." giving me an idea that there are something to show.
